Page 25:
Make an investment plan for yourself.
Decide the different types of investment vehicles you need and the procedure you need to adopt.

Page 27:
A stock derives its value from its dividends. The capital appreciation that takes place is seen primarily from the angle of bonus and right shares, which in turn increase the shareholding leading to higher dividends. As a result the shareholder’s cash flow is augmented. The rise in stock price is
secondary, as there is no intention of selling for capital gain. When a stock goes up in value and one sells it at a profit, that gain is known as capital gain.

Page 31:
The important thing to remember is that investing is all about risk and reward. The higher the risk the greater the reward and vice versa. The investor needs to select the right balance when choosing an investment vehicle and the strategy.

Page 33:
Long-term investing can be very rewarding if you buy theright company at the right price.

Page 34:
Benjamin Graham’s words of warning: “Obvious prospects for physical growth in a business do not translate into obvious profits for investors.”

Page 35:
Investors like Warren Buffet, Charlie Munger, Johnger, J Templeton, and a few others have taken the intellectually difficult path of beating the markets. This path is pursued by those who have a profound understanding of investing, can see future trends clearly, and can comprehend business and the environment. They know that patience is a virtue and therefore take long-term positions.

Page 36:
They strongly believe that opportunities are always there but that when the biggest of them come, one must have the money to invest. They are therefore, very careful about allocating resources. They never buy on impulse. They can be out of the market for months, even years. They have the patience to wait till the right moment Brokers usually do not like such investors as they do not churn their portfolios regularly. Intellectual investors are also emotionally strong.

Page 37:
The day traders also take the physically difficult path of investing. They spend the entire day collecting information and make decisions based on that information. The current volatility in the markets is the result of too many people trying to invest by this method.

Page 38:
When your friends or your broker tell you about a great investment opportunity and they say it is a great time to buy, don’t buy.
When the newspapers report big investment opportunities, be wary of such news.
When your neighbours tell of how the stock markets have made them rich in the last couple of months, don’tbe tempted.

The emotionally difficult path like the intellectually difficult path lays stress on the virtue of patience. Both are based on the view that the long-term approach to investments is the only strategy that can enrich investors and increase their wealth. The stress is on the cash flow approach. Patience focuses an investor’s attention on the goal of compounding money over a long period.
The more you churn your portfolio the more you pay the broker in terms of brokerage and off course the government in terms of taxes on your capital gains. Then you also have costs like depository charges, transaction tax and service tax. All these costs could be avoided if one has patience.

Page 42:
Yet whenever we ask investors about their performance, the majority say that equity investments are risky and they have lost money in the stock market.
They always curse the volatility and blame it for their losses. Even well educated investors with an above average IQ do not do well on the stock markets.
It’s a paradox that while equity investments have done well investors have done poorly.
The reality is that human beings make decisions not only with their minds but also with their hearts. Our emotions define us and we make most of our life decisions on purely emotional considerations.
Our logic and rationale only retrospectively justify these decisions; they do not determine them. Our emotions are subject to change rapidly and this affects our behaviour and decision-making.

Page 45:
Behavioural finance raises a couple of important issues for investors. The first is whether or not it is possible to systematically exploit irrational market behaviour when it occurs. The second issue is how to avoid making sub-optimal decisions as an investor. The goal is to close the gap between how we actually make decisions and how we should make decisions.
Students and proponents of behavioural finance create investment strategies that capitalise on irrational investor behaviour. They seek to identify market conditions in which investors are likely to overreact or under react to new information. These mistakes cause under priced or overpriced securities. The goal of behavioural finance strategies is to invest in or disinvest from these securities before most investors recognise their error, and to benefit from the subsequent jump or fall in prices once they do.

Page 48:
As far as our feelings toward our losses are concerned, we suffer from two behavioural anomalies: Loss Aversion, that is our fear of losing, and Sunk Cost Fallacy, that is our inability to forget money already spent.
As far as our feelings toward gains are concerned, we suffer from Status Quo Bias, that is our inability to make decisions, and the Endowment Effect, that is the tendency to fall in love with what we own and thus resist change

Page 50:
Why is it that when confronted with a sure profit we become conservative and when confronted with a loss we tend to take more risks?
It’s because the pain of a loss is three times more than the pleasure of an equal amount of gain. Over time pain becomes terrifying and pleasure becomes boring.

Page 51:
Impact Of Loss Aversion:
Investors tend to take their profits very early. To be successful in the stock markets it is important to ride the winners and discard the losers. However, loss aversion makes us ultra conservative so we book profits very early. We all suffer from loss aversion and that is the reason we find that winners get small amount of profits and losers pile up huge losses. Winning streaks tend to be short-lived.

Page 52:
Investors tend to hold on to losers and sell winners. A portfolio of stocks with a few winners at the top followed by a long list of losers is not uncommon. As discussed earlier it is because we go for sure gains and take more risks when threatened with a loss.
So if you have one such portfolio you need to know that your decision-making is being controlled by loss aversion. Instead of riding the winners you are riding the losers.

Page 53:
The idea that investors are not risk averse but loss averse is one of the main tenets of behavioural finance.

Page 55:
Impact OF Sunk Cost Fallacy:
Averaging Cost of Purchase: Generally, when investors go wrong in their purchase of stock they buy more at every fall. They believe that this will bring down the cost of their purchase. There is nothing wrong in that, provided they are confident that the stock has great value. But if they buy only to justify past actions, then they are prone to sunk cost fallacy.

Page 58:
One needs to not only diversify within asset classes but also across different assets. A portfolio of equity stocks can be diversified by limiting an individual stock exposure to around 10 per cent and an industry exposure to around 20 per cent. Similarly, all the wealth should not be put into one asset class only; it could be distributed between stocks, bonds, real estate, gold, mutual funds, etc. The idea is that a loss in one asset could be offset by a gain in another. So you are less likely to react emotionally and act foolishly on impulse. As discussed earlier, taking an overall view of your portfolio helps you to avoid loss aversion traps.
You could put your information reports on a spreadsheet to get the big picture. Secondly, it is important to have a solid investment philosophy and a strategy in place. It’s best to put the investment plan down on paper. For example, suppose you take an asset allocation approach. Determine the portion of the portfolio to be invested in stocks, bonds, real estate, etc. Write down the rationale behind each investment particularly if it is stocks. Writing it down increases your commitment to follow the course. In fact it is a way of using sunk cost fallacy to your advantage because you are committing yourself to the plan and will stick by it. When you identify your goals and justify all your investments in the context of achieving those goals you are less likely to react to the ups and downs of the markets.

Page 59:
1. If there is a loss look at the positive side.
You will be able to adjust it against your gains as it is tax deductible.
2. Segregate gains and integrate losses.
3. Pay less attention to your investments:
The point is the more frequently we check our investments the more we feel the urge to react to the ups and downs of the markets. For investors who do not trade professionally. A six-month review of a portfolio is frequent enough to make necessary adjustments in asset allocation. Yes, one might miss a market dip or a rise but it is a good trade off against peace of mind.

Page 64:
A significant consequence of decision paralysis in financial
decisions is that by deferring purchase you may miss the
opportunity or run the risk of prices rising.

How often have you not seen a stock move up and regret you
did not buy it when you could at a much lower price?

We have to understand that deciding not to take a
decision is also a decision. When we take a decision we give
ourselves a chance to move from the present comfort zone. Once
we do that we have a 50-50 chance of going right or wrong. If we
choose not to take a decision we miss this chance of going right.
Maintaining a status quo in times of continuous change is definitely
unwise.

Page 72:
The endowment effect leads people to go in for instantpeople to g
gratification and to ignore future opportunity costs. Some peoplegratification and to ignore future opportunity costs. Some peop
refuse to invest in public provident funds even though they benefitpublic provident funds even though they
from the employer having to put in an equal amount. They wantployer having to put in an equal amount. They
to enjoy the pleasure of getting the whole salary without deduction.joy the pleasure of getting the whole salary
Only, this pleasure comes at the cost of foregoing future highery
benefits.
Because of the endowment effect investors get caught up inget caught up
their desire to seek endorsement of their actions. Investors seekinformation that supports their existing point of view, whilepports their existing p
avoiding information that contradicts their opinion. Psychologistg information that contradicts their opinion. Psycholog
Thane Pigman in Slip of the Tongue sums it up well: “I see it whengman in Slip of the Tongue sums it up
I believe it.” Company visits and analysts meet are good examplespany
of confirmation traps.
Page 73:


Are you a victim of decision paralysis and endowmenteffect?
Deciding not to decide is also a decision.
Consider the opportunity costs. You believe that investingin stocks is a risky decision. You prefer to keep your money iny decision. You prefer to keep your money
bank deposits. This is not wrong, but when you invest in stocksposits. This is not wrong, but when y
you are investing in the future. Suppose when you had theyou are investing in the future. Suppose when y
opportunity to invest in stocks you didn’t and the price went up.pportunity to invest in stocks you didn’t and the price went up
You would regret not taking a chance when you could. Imagininggret not taking a chance when you could. Imagining
the benefits that would accrue will help you to overcome yourresistance to change.
Put yourself on autopilot. Every month earmark a fixed sumyourself on autopilot. Every
towards investment in stocks. This will enable you to ride the bully
and the bear waves without panicking. On the contrary you willpanicking. On the contrary y
be able to manage the heartburns that come with this volatility.
Page 74:
Change your frame of reference. Approach decisions fromge your frame of reference. App
a neutral state. Here’s how to do it. You hold shares of Tata Steeland your friend recommends that you sell it and buy Jindal Ironyour friend recommends that you sell it and buy J
and Steel instead. You cannot decide what to do. The best way isy
to imagine that you do not have any stock of Tata Steel but thatyou do not have any
you have cash that you can invest. You then decide between Tatayou have cash that y
Steel and Jindal. If your choice is Tata Steel then don’t convert. IfJindal. If y
the choice is Jindal, go ahead and make the switch. This soundsJindal, g
simple and it is. The difficult part is recognising that your decisionple and it is. The difficult part is recognising that y
is being hampered by your approach to the problem.
Don’t get married to your stocks. Investments are made tocreate income and wealth. Your goal is to go from one comfortgoal is to g
level to another and for that you need different investment vehiclesy
to meet your different requirements. Once they have fulfilledyour different requirements. Once they
their task and helped you reach your goal you have to let go. Youped y
do not stay with them forever.
Understand that there is no free lunch. When you get toy
take home goods on trial, when you get invited for companygoods on trial, when you get invited for company
visits, analysts’ meets, or sales promotion parties, please treatysts’ meets, or sales promotion parties, p
them with scepticism. Don’t allow yourself to feel good aboutpticism. Don’t allow yourself to feel g
such offers. Always look for the catch. Be detached and don’ty
allow your emotions to control your decision-making.
Learn to apply the Dale Carnegie Principle on worry.When we have to take decisions we worry about the consequences.y about the conseq
Before running away, ask yourself what is the worst that cang away, ask y
happen if you take the decision. Analyse the facts and the situation;ppen if you take the decision. Analy
it may not be as bad as you think. Be prepared for the worst, theny not be as bad as y
go ahead and take the decision.
Page 77:
Mental Accounting is an idea developed and championed byg is an idea developed and championed by
Richard Thaler. It underlines one of the most common and costlyy
mistakes people make when dealing with money. It is the tendencypeople make when dealing with money. It is the tendency
to place different values to the same sum of money depending onplace different values to the same sum of money depending
how it has been acquired and the effort required to acquire it.quired and the effort required to acq
Traditional economic theory assumes that money is fungible,y assumes that money is fung
meaning that one type of monetary unit can replace another. Thisg that one type of monetary unit can rep
means that Rs. 100 in lottery winnings, Rs. 100 in salary and ay winnings, Rs. 100 in salary
Rs. 100 tax refund should have the same meaning as they haveg as they
the same purchasing power. But studies indicate this is not sopurchasing p
with individuals. People mentally separate their money in differentple mentally separate their money
accounts, giving each account a different significance.
Page 79:
We create mental accounts according to the quantity of the moneyg to the quantity of the money
and treat them differently. A tax refund is a tax deferral paymenty. A tax refund is a tax deferral pay
by the tax authorities. But when we get a tax refund of sayy the tax authorities. But when we get a tax refund of say
Rs. 1000 we are likely to spend that without giving it due thought.y to spend that without giving it due thoug
However, a tax refund of Rs. 20000 will set us thinking whetherg
to deposit it in a bank, or buy mutual funds and stocks. We doposit it in a bank, or buy
this because small amounts go into the miscellaneous accountg
and big amounts go into important decision accounts.
you happy, but do y
Do you realise that if youpping for groceries? Do you realise that if y
put in a little effort and are able to save Rs. 10 a day, at the end ofput in a little effort and are able to save Rs. 10 a day
the year it would add up to a savings of Rs. 3500? Compare thisyear it would add up to a savings of Rs. 3500? Comp
with the saving of Rs. 500 on an expense that may not recur forg of Rs. 500 on an expense that may
the next 10 years or so. Many people are cost conscious whenyears or so. Many peop
making large financial decisions, but they relax their discipliney relax their discip
when it comes to small purchases. But that’s where the differencematters.
Page 80:
	

Ramesh was a successful investor and had done reasonably welly
for himself. One day he inherited Rs. 10 lakhs from his uncle.y
The uncle had worked hard and saved his money all his life. Hey
did not take any risks and looked after his money with care.y risks and looked after his money
Ramesh treated this money as sacred as he had received it fromy
someone who had toiled all his life to earn it. He would notconsider putting it into the stock market where he had doneputting
reasonably well. Instead he put it into bank deposits. The moneyy well. Instead he put it into bank deposits. The money
was marked “sacred” in his mental account. Had his uncle beenextravagant maybe Ramesh would have played the stock marketsgant may
with that money.
Why do investors hold on to losing investments? They mayy do investors hold on to losing investments? They may
offer various reasons to justify their action but the fact remainsjustify
that mentally they are unwilling to accept that they are makingy they are unwilling to accept that they
a loss. Mentally we tend to believe that we book a loss onlyy we tend to believe that we book a loss only
when we sell. Intellectually we recognise the loss but wey we recog
hope that it will vanish. This is a common mental accountingpe that it will vanish. This is a common mental accounting
error. On the contrary a loss can be adjusted against a profit,y a loss can be adjusted against a p
resulting in tax savings. Yet investors continue to fall prey tog in tax saving
this common mental accounting error.
Page 81:
Most people believe that a bonus share is a freebie given bypeople believe that a bonus share is a freebie given by
the company to its shareholders. They even buy more sharespany to its shareholders. They even buy
on such news. But they are dead wrong. Companies givey are dead wrong. Companies g
bonus shares to capitalise reserves and balance their finances.p
But investors don’t see it that way. They consider it to be ay. They
windfall. This leads them to become extravagant. Mostg
investors suffer from this mental accounting error. That’sg
why the stock markets rise on such announcements.
p
The best advice is to refrain from usingcredit cards, and to treat all monies equally
Page 83:
The best way to be resourceful with your money is to treat ally to be resourceful with your money
money as earned income. Whenever you get any money asky as earned income. Whenever you get any money
yourself this question: How long will it take me to earn thisyourself this q
amount of money after taxes?
Page 85:
Although both the lines are the same why is it that the lowergh both the lines are the same why
line appears longer? That’s because the brain takes a short cutppears long
when processing information. It does not process all theprocessing information. It does not p
information and this leads to biases. This process is known asMental Heuristics
The dictionary definition of the word heuristic refers to they
process by which people reach conclusions, usually by trial andprocess by which people reach conclusions, usually by
error. This often leads them to develop thumb rules, but these arep
not always accurate. One of the greatest advances of behaviouralys accurate. One of the g
psychology is the identification of the principles underlying thesepsychology is the identification of the principles underly
thumb rules and the errors associated with them. In turn theserules have themselves come to be called heuristics. In short, thefollowing four statements define Heuristic Bias.
People develop general principles as they find out things for
p
themselves.
People rely on heuristics to draw inferences from available
ple rely
information.
People are susceptible to certain errors because the heuristics
ple are suscep
they use are imperfect.
People actually commit errors in particular situations.
Page 86:
Take the example of Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) whenp
the company discovered a gas vein. The stock jumped as investorspany discovered a gas vein. The stock jump
cashed in on this news. But let us analyse the situation withouty
falling prey to mental heuristics. The gas source was discoveredg prey to mental heuristics. The g
but there were other factors to be considered—the quality of thequality
gas, the number of wells to be drilled, the time it would take, theg
plans to finance the project, etc.—before the profits could beplans to finance the project, etc.—before the p
reaped. Yet analysts predicted the future profitability of RIL andped. Yet analysts predicted the future profitability
on such hopes investors bought the stock at rising prices. This ispes investors bought the stock at rising p
how mental heuristics work when the brain does not process allthe information and its implications.
Page 87:
analysis revealed that the India Shining story had beenpost analysis revealed that the India Shining story
aggressively sold in the major cities; hence the exit polls in theseggressively sold in the major cities; hence the exit p
cities placed the NDA’s chances very high. But 70 per cent of theplaced the NDA’s chances very high. But 70 p
population lives in the rural areas and for them India was notpop
shining. Thus NDA lost. On May 17, 2004 the markets crashedg. Thus NDA lost. On May
by more than 800 points in just two days. The reason: all availabley more than 800 points in just two day
information was negative. In bull markets there is only positivegative. In bull markets there is only p
news and in bear markets it is only negative. That’s why marketsy
go up or come down on reflexivity.
We assess the likelihood of an event by its similarity toy its similarity
other occurrences. A predominant bias associated with this isp
over reaction. In the stock markets, if the leaders report impressiveport imp
performances then all the stocks in that particular sector benefit.performances then all the stocks in that p
The fortunes of the steel industry seemed to be changing andy seemed to be changing
Tata Steel reported increased earnings and profits. All the stocksported increased earnings and p
in the sector, including the junk and penny stocks, attractedg the junk and penny
investors’ interest irrespective of whether they too would reportincreased earnings.
Individuals over react to an unusual event assuming itto be a permanent trend. Two aeroplanes crash into the Worldpermanent trend. Two aerop
Trade Centre and the world stops flying the next day.
Page 89:
respect the markets.y others like him. My advice is, resp
They are interesting because we cannot understand them.
Successful investors sometimes believe that they are skilfuly
because they are doing well with their investments. However,y
they fail to realise that their investment performance is the resulty fail to realise that their investment p
of the stock market performance, not necessarily their individualperformance, not necessarily
abilities. In bullish times the stock markets are up and so is thep
performance of most of the mutual funds. By definition theyperformance of most of the mutual funds. By definition they
capture the mutuality of the markets. It is at this point that fundpture the mutuality of the markets. It is at this p
managers can become overconfident and go all out to garnermore business. There is a famous saying, “A rising tide lifts allying, “A rising
boats”. A corollary to that would be “A rising market lifts allegos”.
Page 91:
Individuals start with an initial value and make value assessmentsbased on that value. The initial value may reflect historicaly
precedent, current information or random information. The biasp
reflects people’s insufficient adjustment to their initial values. Thepeople’s insufficient adj
problem is acute when the initial value is not properly grounded.problem is acute when the initial value is not properly g
When individuals are anchored they under react to any newy under react to any
information that is made available to them. This is how anchoringbecomes dangerous.
Page 93:
In the stock markets most often investors allow popular opinionpopular op
and behaviour to define values for them; sometimes for the goodg
but often not. Their buying or selling decisions are made not ony
the basis of their own convictions, but on the value that strangersappropriate.
Page 96:
Investors anchor their future projections on past performances,projections on past p
seeing the future as a repeat of the past. In panic situations ourg the future as a repeat of the past. In p
minds may be guided by our emotions. Hence we may undery be guided by our emotions. Hence we may
react or overreact. Investing is a fairly emotional activity; henceg is a fairly emotional activity
we must be aware of our senses and our programmed responsesto specific situations.
